Just that again?
G-R-I-B-B-E-N.
And Alan Gribben is a professor in the English department who has written about Mark Twain as a book collector.
And he has gotten this assignment to do this biography of ransom.
And I cannot imagine a less imaginative
more flat-footed choice of people to come up with.
But he has gotten himself an excuse from his teaching assignment to do this.
Yeah, but it sounds like a house job, though.
It is.
I'm certain to be a house job.
I'd call it the critical biography would be a misnomer in all.
I mean, he's tenured, so at least that helps.
Well, I don't think that he is not the kind of person who would necessarily
You don't go in-house to get an objective biography out of it.
And I'm not exactly certain what has gone into the commissioning selection process, but they have, apparently, working with him, Graves Landrum, who is a man surely retired, a name that I have always known as someone who was always kind of an executive vice president type,
in the system.
Maybe he was in the development office or, and he's always been a company man.
And they have been going through ransom files.
And I understand that last week there was a big meeting about the status of ransom files and whether other people would ever be allowed to see them or not, which I cannot believe has anything to do
It is.
They want to know when I'm coming.
They've turned me over to this guy here.
And this is unprecedented for me.
They asked me for questions in advance.
He doesn't ask for the questions there, but he called me.
I was on vacation in Florida.
He reached me.
He found me in Florida.
They're kind of in a panic about your coming.
You think so?
I think they may be.
Well, do you think this letter was a mistake?
I'll shut this off.
Well, I think that you are, there are a lot of people who know.
Tom doesn't really know that much about the stories that went on.
That does give him a level of deniability, which is good, too.
Not deniability, but which would mean perhaps that he could talk, frankly, about what he had nothing to do with.
But yes and no.
Tom is very much a forward-looking kind of guy.
He is not going to wrestle with Ransom's ghost.
He's going to go on and be his own Ransom.
And his predecessor, Decker Turner, a very controversial director of the end,
He really wrestled with Ransom's ghost.
And... Decker Turner did.
Decker Turner did.
And recreated a lot of the Ransom myths and overstated a lot of the... And really kind of muddled the record terribly, I think.
And I think that there are a lot of people who knew Ransom.
and who were there at the time, who would be much better witnesses for you, if that's really what you want to get back to.
Well, I would just like a little bit of color, you know?
Well, I don't think you'll get it from Tom.
Yeah, but I'm going to be there for two days.
Three days.
Well, um... I mean, really, two hours, I think I'll get what I need from Tom.
Well... Two hours are kind of better to help you, repeating the questions.
I mean, I think that my...
I'm not going to tell you how to write the book, but Tom really wants to talk about his own ideas about the collection.
And he is not an inconsiderable collector, because you know what his background is at Tulsa.
Right.
Well, Tulsa had a lot of money, too.
And Tulsa wanted to create a collection from scratch, just the same way HRC had done.
Did they?
Yes, they did.
And Tom came down.
Tom was the dean.
And Tom was the ransom.
And Tom came down to the HRC.
He's a very beguiling, charming guy.
And he said, I want to do everything right that you have done and avoid anything wrong that you can tell me that I should avoid.
And how do you work this?
And can I see your forms?
And what kind of shelves do you use?
And how do you get your collections?
And he really built the idea.
took the idea of modern, and he limited it to British collecting, and really at a time when the acquisitions fever was cooling off at Texas, he was able to get a lot of things that would have normally gone to Texas and worked with the same dealers and some of the same people.
One person who used to work at Texas ended up to a time that's ahead of the
of the Special Collections Library at Tulsa.
Now, you've heard, you've talked to some people in Texas that are aware of my... Well, one of the assistant directors, or the assistant director, Sally Leach, I was with in Chicago over the weekend, and she told me that they were having this big flap about the access to the ransom papers.
And I said, well, don't you think it's because it doesn't have anything to do with McBadsey's Cummings?
And apparently she had a message from you, so it was a very small one.
But there are people like Warren Roberts, who was the director of HRC from 1965, or whenever it was officially created, to 1978 or so.
who was there and worked with Ransom and built the collection.
Is he there now?
Yeah.
He's retired.
He lives on Windsor Road.
I have a double number down.
Is it Windsor with a D?
I think it was a D, mm-hmm, and then the house of Windsor.
And the other person who's been there every blow-by-blow step of the way is Bill Todd, William B. Todd, and they live on Exposition.
And his wife, Ann Baden, was the first librarian of the Academic Center, which was the library that was created to house a lot of materials.
I'm new to the story, okay?
Again, this is one of these stories where I've been working on it for a while.
And people say, you've got to go to Texas.
And I say, well, what am I going to see there besides a great collection?
It's a great story.
I say, well, has anybody written it?
And what is it?
What is the Texas story, as you know it?
Tell me what I can use and what I can't use.
I'd just like to know.
You can use any of it.
Shoot.
Did you mind if we found out there?
In the late, there was, at the University of Texas, a history of rare books, special collections.
You can go back to Wren, you know.
Yes, there was a Latin American collection, an extremely fine one, still is there.
There was a Texas history collection, still there, very fine one.
And there was what was called the Stark Library, which included the Stark was a Texas collector, Mrs. Stark from Orange, Texas, and the Wren Library were the two largest collections.
very fine, very traditional 18th, 19th century literary collections, autographs and first editions.
And Dr. Ransom, in the late 50s, wanted to build a library of the
He started out as an English professor.
He rose rapidly through the campus ranks.
He was even briefly president of the UT campus.
But this was all happening so fast.
They were creating the University of Texas system, and he became eventually the chancellor of the University of Texas system.
And he started as an English professor.
and a copyright expert, and no stranger to textual studies, but not really strictly a bibliographer.
And he wanted to build up the library all over, you know.
Not just Austin?
Not just, but, well, mostly just Austin.
Austin's always been the flagship.
But he really wanted to build up
Not just the special collections, but all of the libraries.
But he really concentrated on the research collection.
And this idea of the Humanities Research Center really took form in the late 50s.
And the idea was to concentrate on 20th century, but not exclusively 20th century materials, modern art and letters and film and photographs.
And not exclusively living, but mostly British-American.
And humanity is very broadly interpreted.
And they acquired tremendous things by gift, as well as by purchase.
But the first big purchase that they made was the Hanley collection.
Now, you want an interesting collector.
That T.E.
Hanley, Ed Hanley.
was an oil man from Bradford, Pennsylvania, and he collected D. H. Lotz and George Bernard Shaw and all these manuscripts.
They had so much stuff, and they also collected art, not of the same quality, but they had so many paintings that they were hanging on the ceilings in the bathroom and on the backs of the closet doors.
And among his most interesting collections was his wife, Tula, who was a belly dancer, and her sister, Ami.
Do you know this?
And they lived in Bradford, Pennsylvania.
And Tula Hanley, who claims to have been, to have slept with most of, all kinds of assorted people, wrote a biography.
She used to get arrested all the time for correcting the youth of Bradford.
She wrote a book that was- Bradford, Pennsylvania.
Bradford, Pennsylvania.
How did this get to Texas?
Money.
They buy it through Lou?
Through Jake Schwartz.
Jake Schwartz.
He was a dentist.
Jesus Christ.
And painful extractions.
Painless extractions, I mean.
How did he get to sell books to Texas?
Carlton Lake wrote a piece in the New York Times a couple of years ago.
You know, the bottom half of the book review, bottom page of the book review that tells the whole story about Hanley and Jake Schwartz and Samuel Beckett, who Beckett collection, the Beckett materials were also involved in all this.
But anyway, Hanley was the first big collection.
His wife, the motto in writing her biography was, I aspire to inspire before I expire.
She wrote this book?
Yeah.
No.
Was it published?
I don't think it's widely available.
Well, Widener Library might have it.
I don't think so.
What's the name of it?
It's something, it's really a schlock book.
That's okay.
But at any rate, Hanley was this first big collection, and that was acquired in 1958.
And with that, this was the first big collection that they got.
And I think they spent a million dollars for it.
That's 32 years ago.
That's a lot of money.
Yeah, but I mean, like the corrected page proofs for Ulysses.
Whoever would have thought this guy out of some place in Pennsylvania would have a collection like this.
They had so much stuff in the house that the insurance company wouldn't let them keep the modern manuscripts in the house.
So they had like a multi-car garage, and they got...
metal footlockers.
That's a great story.
And put them in between the things.
How do you know all this?
Is this a fact or is this written something?
No, there's a lot.
There are people who have been there.
And the two people I can think of who have been there most specifically both worked on the George Bernard Shaw thing.
One of them is Stanley Weintraub, who is at Penn State.
And the other one is Dan Lawrence, L-A-U-R-E-N-C-E.
who is a senior, very senior Shaw scholar.
And both of them were at Bradford as graduate students, you know, worked there and were, you know, entertained and had couscous and whatever.
Did this guy die for us before the collection was there, or did he sell it?
Did it go before he...
I think he was alive when it came, but maybe he died shortly thereafter.
But Dr. Ransom convinced the legislature to use part of the oil money from the state to build the library collection.
And it was committed a million dollars a year for ten years.
Is this in, do you think this will be in newspaper clips and stuff?
Yeah.
I mentioned this to you, there's this little pamphlet called Building 20th Century Collections, or something like that, that is a house piece at HRC, and has a picture of the building on the outside.
And that tells, I don't think I have, I know I don't have one here.
And that tells a lot of this same story.
No, it doesn't give any of this stuff, though.
Well, it, yeah.
Let me ask you a question.
I'm a guy writing a book about book collections.
I'm looking for nice stories.
Why should I get excited about my?
They want me there.
They're welcoming me, and they're saying, can you tell us what you want to talk about?
And I thought that letter was vague enough.
Do you think so?
Very harmless letter.
Oh, no.
These people don't have anything to hide.
Look how many hundreds of decades later it is.
Is it embarrassing?
There's nothing embarrassing.
I've got quotes from three people, and I will use them, and I'll name the people.
Nicholas Barker, Roger Studd at the Houghton Library at Harvard, and Bob Nykirk at the Groglia Club.
And they've all said, in other words, what people say is indiscriminate collecting at Texas is sour grapes.
sour grapes, because the collection is what counts.
And according to Barker, Ransom is on record as saying, this money doesn't last forever, and let's do it while we can, because we'll never have the opportunity again.
Now, I don't see what's wrong with that, really.
There's nothing wrong with it.
There are a lot of things that went on.
It may not be Marcus of Queensbury rules.
Maybe Luke Feldman is not Dr. Rosenblatt.
And it's not just that.
There are a couple of things.
This doesn't answer your question, but this is a clause on my mind.
A lot of people, and Turner was chief among them, who went on and on and on about this ransom syndrome, he called it.
That's a very majority term, I think, but this ransom syndrome of collecting.
That's a common loose phrase, isn't it?
Turner's the only one who ever used it.
Turner, again, is?
This unfortunate director who Staley replaced.
Turner said the Ransom Syndrome?
He called it.
He used that phrase?
Yes.
That is interesting to me.
Oh, listen.
Did he directly succeed Ransom?
No, no, no, no.
Ransom was never the director of the HRC, except maybe like for two minutes while he was creating it.
He was always up here.
He was a mover.
He was the mover.
He was the deal-maker.
And the nominal director of HRC from its inception was Warren Roberts.
Warren Roberts was booted out through political fisticuffs.
And this guy's alive and well and living in Austin, Texas.
Yeah, with two new hips and three new knees.
They know my dates.
They're probably going to send him to Acapulco when I'm done.
Yeah, yeah.
And he, and Roberts was there until, as I recall, it was like 78.
And then we had this kind of interim business, and Turner came in about 80, 80, let's say.
And they suffered with him.
I left in 83.
And you started there when?
Part-time in 71.
And why don't you just tell me what you did when you were there?
Well, I used to be the airplane girl.
I worked for two years in the History of Aviation collection, one of the more tangential collections.
And I did, you can quote me, nothing, absolutely nothing.
And then I worked in the director's office.
Is it a strong aviation collection, at least?
There is.
They gave it to UT Dallas, the History of Aviation Collection.
They flew it up to now.
They had a sailplane and all kinds of things.
And then I worked as, basically, I had different titles, but I eventually became the research librarian, and I helped the people who were working on the research, doing research in the management collection.
But Ransom, this, yes.
The only time I ever went to him was I spent lots of my time trying to go back and sort out the history of the acquisition of various things and solve various mysteries about present-day problems.
Is this stuff all documented?
I mean, in the proceedings or something like that?
No, there's no proceedings.
Well, I mean, it's a state-owned institution.
I mean, they must have records that indicate where we got something and for whom we bought it and how much we paid.
But not in any kind of a, you know, ledger book kind of thing that you would have access to.
Well, I'm sure, open records, I mean, could you get access to all that?
Oh, and we know how much Rosenbach paid for the Ulysses manuscripts.
Well, the public auction.
Well, that's just an example.
But you had records of his trips to England, I mean, you know, where he did.
His records were not complete.
Yeah, but he's not a state-mandated institution, either.
Well, the record-keeping has always been not altogether straightforward.
What I was going to say is I often was trying to untangle a lot of things.
And the only time I would ever see Ransom, I would sometimes go into his office to ask him about, you know,
What was the background of this particular thing, and this is the problem I would have?
And he would say, always.
I never got an answer other than this.
Well, my child, that's a very complex matter.
I'm like, I know what you think I'm in here for.
Do you think I would have waited for three weeks to read you?
In response to what kind of a question?
Give me a direct question.
Oh, let's see.
I'm not being evasive.
I'm only being forgetful.
But let's say I was trying to figure out...
Oh, there was a big hullaballoon once about these Rembrandt etchings.
I mean a big hullaballoon.
I don't think I asked Dr. Ransom this because I think he must have.
I don't think I was involved with this, but it would be a kind of thing like this.
Dr. Ransom bought a large collection of miscellaneous prints, etchings, for study purposes.
They paid something like a dollar a piece for them.
And some, and most of them, some of them were probably worth 50 cents.
But some of them turned out to be Rembrandt etchings, or maybe were always known to be Rembrandt etchings, or whatever.
And they were always intended kind of for study and office decoration.
And some of them, at one point,
Through Dr. Ransom's assistant, Frances Hudson, who is this, she took a lot of her praise with her, I'm sure of that, were lent to a big private dormitory that was having a big opening.
The Hardin House was having a big opening, and they were having a kind of a little university town and gown kind of thing, and they had an exhibition over there.
And that's the last anybody could ever find any record of these Rembrandt things.
Well, it probably is not what happened to them, but some graduate student got on this kick about doing a project cataloging the Rembrandt etchings in the various collections at the university.
And it ended up being turned over to the university auditors.
And it was a big, big, big, hullabaloo.
But anyway, it would be sometimes things like that, trying to track down.
Is stuff covered pretty well in the Austin newspapers, or do you think Dallas?
Not Dallas.
And only very spottily in the Austin newspaper.
If I wanted to go read some stuff that is outside of the university, where would I go?
Library Journal?
I mean, do they do anything on this?
There have been a number of articles
fairly large, comprehensive articles written about the Texas collection.
The London Observer did a big article.
With any of the stuff that you're talking about?
No, it was just more, much more an overview kind of thing.
I mean, this thing about this Rembrandt thing, you asked
It would be kind of mindless little tracking down problems with individuals.
Did he have any feel for what he was getting?
Oh, sure.
There were some things that he did that were very controversial, and Robert and Todd supported this even more so.
They felt, for instance,
that multiple copies of 20th century literary texts were important to acquire for comparison and collation purposes.
But they have 41 Ulysses.
Yeah, 41 and a half or whatever it is.
Now that is, they said it was the same thing as Folger and First Folio.
Of course, Folger's been accused of
And not sharing with scholars, either.
And you look at the stacks at Texas, and here they are, you know, eight copies of the first edition of Lady Chattery's Lever, you know, 20 copies.
And it just seems to be ridiculous in the minds of a lot of people.
Not only did they jack the prices of modern firsts and certainly 20th century manuscripts up,
But then they bought much more than they could ever use or need.
But this ransom syndrome that Turner referred to, he made claims that ransom was the first person who ever realized that the history of the text starts before the first edition.
I mean, Turner was shown to be such an ass in the minds of the book world, and a very bizarre character, but it was such a, I found it such a derision of what Ransom
was doing because he was making claims that Ransom himself never made.
Such as?
And that he was the first person to recognize the value in collecting modern literary papers.
Well, what are the Bhatnikis?
You know, what was all that about?
Joe Clinton.
Yeah.
And this whole bullshit about the first person to recognize that the history of the text began with the
before the first edition and back through the page proofs and the galleys and the manuscripts and the drafts and things.
Well, it's just stupid.
And so a lot.
You don't necessarily need to talk to Johnny-come-latelys about the ransom syndrome or whatever.
If you're going to talk to anybody and not rely just on published accounts,
I certainly would think you should talk to people who were there, rather than people who were there.
And you gave me three names.
Yeah, and there are, and Sally Leach has been there much longer than anybody else on the staff now.
She works?
She works in Tom's office.
She is the assistant director, unless Tom tells her not to, and I don't know.
Ray Dom doesn't know anything.
Ray Dalm came to H.R.C.
with the Gloria Swanson collection.
Which Howard Gottlieb lost.
That's in my story.
He was wooing her.
I've got a wonderful book.
You know Howard Gottlieb with Boston Boys.
And he said, I was going to her house.
He said, I was eating macrobiotic foods that was coming out of my ears.
And he said, and I wake up one morning and I read.
I hear on the radio that they sold the glorious Swanson collection to Texas for a million dollars.
Well, and, I mean, Turner's the one who got the Selznick and got the Swanson and got the... Well, that's a pretty big money, though.
Oh, really?
I couldn't even know that.
We bought them at auction for Texas.
Which papers?
I don't know.
Whose papers?
They needed them.
But he got this Uzielli collection, and the Four-Timer collection.
I mean, I just think that was pretty ... I think I'm just against the Four-Timer collection because Turner bought it.
And Ransom and the Four-Timer family talked for years and years about amalgamating those two collections.
But it all turned out, in the end, to be pretty funny.
His nephew has the finest collection of espionage books.
Did you know that?
In fact, he took out a whole suite at the Watergate.
He was a charter member of the CIA.
It's very interesting.
I'm going to be going to see this guy.
Are you going to talk about the Fort Simon in your book?
Yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Larry McMurtry is a great story.
She's a writer and a book dealer.
A Cadillac Jack is about a scout.
She just has some very interesting things.
It's going to be fun.
Does the book sound interesting, by the way, that I'm doing?
Oh, yeah.
That sounds great.
We're already buying copies.
I'll describe how you get.
Texas has always felt very much on the defensive.
And there were a lot of things subject to much... You mean because of the technique that they use to acquire?
Right, and there are a lot.
Not because of the product.
The product is world class.
Well, there's a lot of crap there, but there's a lot of... Roger Kennedy at the Smithsonian.
I mean, to drop names, but I just talked to him last week.
He did a book on Greek revival of America, and I know him anyway.
In fact, not mentioning you, but I...
throughout the quote about, you know, how do you feel about places that buy a lot of junk?
No, in fact, I didn't say junk.
I said, I used your analogy of the sunken wreck.
And he said, but you know, he said, sometimes the junk is, you really have to look at the junk.
He runs the American Museum of National History.
Yeah, where they collect a lot of junk.
And he said, you have to really look at junk to understand the masterpiece.
He said, sometimes if you just look at the masterpiece, you really don't know.
He said, I'm all for junk.
He gave me, which is a great quote, you know, I'm all for junk.
Well, there's stuff in Texas, you know, like history of sports collection.
Well, you know, they don't need that.
Baseball.
Yeah, but somebody... Drawers of baseball.
I mean, they even have a woman's ashes.
Did you know that?
But the Boston Athenaeum has a...
A highwayman's memoir is bound in his own skin.
So, I mean, there are all kinds of... And the great quote is, from the guy that runs the athleticism, it has no literary merit whatsoever.
It's the binding that makes it interesting.
But the thing at Texas is that there were a lot of things that were very controversial as far as acquiring all this stuff,
buying it on credit through a limited number of dealers, getting so far out on the limb in terms of they had stuff in-house that they wouldn't pay for for three years hence.
Much less leaving stuff in-house.
Okay.
They were getting collections.
They'd already spent this year's millions, but they were still getting stuff.
And Fellman's going to sell them.
Okay, this is on next year's million.
And Fellman didn't care.
Fellman didn't care because they were going to pay him 10% on the money.
And then when they got to like the third year out, Fellman's still sending the stuff.
They're buying everything and auctioning all these private sales.
All these deals are coming to them.
They got nervous thinking, my gosh, what if
the sky falls in, and we don't have this money, and we should not be—well, we didn't want to process the collection anyway—but we shouldn't even be making it available to people unless it's really anors.
So they started restricting big collections, saying that it would not be available until such-and-such a time.
So often, given the kind of
you know, not cavalier, but dramatic way, a lot of this stuff was being acquired.
Things were being snatched right out from under people's noses.
There were situations where scholars had been working on papers.
They're sold to Texas, and then they're told that they can't have access to them for two or three years.
Well, that's enough to wrinkle a few people's scouts.
And so there are a lot of things like that that just created a lot of
What would you like to know about Texas that you don't know, having worked there?
Would you pretty much feel you know all the answers?
I mean, is that pretty much it?
If you were me looking to nail something down, what would you think I should be looking for?
I feel very positive about the place.
I do not think
Texas is a very frontier kind of society, and there has been a lot of politics, a lot of money thrown in to kind of mix things up.
There's been a lot of heads have rolled up and down the aisle, and I think that's all part of the fun of it all.
You always took sides, and you always knew what sides you were on, and, you know, that was always part of it.
But I think the immutable value of what's there is, you know, without... Why do you suppose Ransom chose to work with one guy in New York?
I don't know that.
And I'm not saying he was the only one, and certainly Anthony Roeder and the firm of Bertram Roeder limited in that.
But I've heard stories that some people might come and offer something to Texas at a decent price.
Texas won't buy it.
You sell it to him.
You give it to Feldman, Feldman will bring it to Texas and double the price, or whatever the factor is, and they'll buy it.
And people like Rendell make the same claim that he couldn't sell stuff to Texas, but that he could sell it to Johnny Jenkins, and that Johnny could sell it.
Johnny's going to know the whole story all by himself.
According to the New Yorker piece, he didn't sell that much to Texas.
He didn't.
But Johnny had kind of a once-a-year sale for Texas.
And Johnny would come in the day the money was released, if not before, but kind of on that kind of thing.
And he would have a little set deal.
This is what he's going to sell this year.
And some of that stuff would be stuff that Rendell...
You're talking about the guy from Boston, Rendell?
Yeah.
Rendell is all the time yelling at me about... He's very close.
He's right next door.
And Rendell goes berserk on this subject, because he says, you know, I would offer this stuff to Texas, and they wouldn't even look at it.
But I would sell it to Johnny.
He loved that story I wrote.
Yeah, you told me that.
He wrote a letter to the magazine, the best piece.
But Ken basically sold, and always sold, autograph collections.
And Texas didn't buy autograph collections.
But they bought a bunch of stuff from— Well, they bought a lot of manuscript stuff.
But not an autograph.
You know, autograph—an autograph dealer, an autograph collector values a single-page letter.
It can be framed before the prints of the person or photographs and so on.
And a premium is paid for a single-page letter because the signature and the address and the text are all on the same side.
And that's not, that has to do with the research value of the piece.
The best letter that a president ever wrote the day after he got out of office is probably worth less to a manuscript collector because the premium is paid for the things written while he's now.
Who's the president that only was in for one month?
You know, he died right away.
That's why his stuff, they say, is... Yeah, he doesn't know.
Whatever.
Nick Cannon?
No, no, no.
One of the most forgettable presidents ever.
Yeah, yeah.
Because he died so quickly.
He got sick in his... But his stuff is... Anything he signed while he was president is worth a ton, worth a fortune, because he was helping president for such a short time.
But I'm not saying that Texas didn't buy autograph kind of stuff.
So Rendell might have an axe to grind, in other words.
Yeah, but Ken has done lots for Texas and has done a lot of appraisals for Texas.
I'm not looking to do a number on Texas, by any means.
I'm a collector who believes that the collection really is in itself, as long as you didn't kill anybody for it or break a lot, you know, or commit any felonies to get it.
I think part of the issue has always been, also, that ransom dealt.
moved in very mysterious ways.
Do you think he was a believer in the Gordian knot theory of Alexander the Great, don't untie the knot, just cut it with a knife, the sword, and this decisive, expeditious way of doing things?
No, no.
Oh, God, no.
So he went through the channels and he did the red tape stuff?
No.
What I mean is that Ransom was a dreamer.
And he left the execution to other people.
I have seen letters that Ransom wrote to, for instance, Earl Stanley Gardner.
In convincing Gardner, and all of the Gardner papers and books and everything, but there is a letter, several letters, that Ransom wrote to Gardner.
about how the Earl Stanley Gardner collection will serve as the centerpiece for understanding the 20th century mind and, you know, the seminal nature of law enforcement in our, you know, world today.
But it is like melodies.
Yes.
You don't get much of a sense of time when you're reading through files.
Do you think a letter like that is accessible?
I don't know.
It's in the file.
But Ransom told everybody, whether the collection was being purchased or bought, that they were going to be the center of attention.
And I once had in mind that they would create this kind of a lazy Susan deal.
Quick, quick, you know, collector X is coming.
Dial that into the rotary deal so his collection room would come up.
Let me tell you a story.
Howard Gottlieb at BU, you know Howard, a charming guy.
And he invited my wife and I to a dinner one night.
I've forgotten about his name.
Big, big Hollywood director, married to Edward G. Robinson's widow.
Big collector.
And at this dinner party was Mike Merrill, Betty Davis' son.
In fact, she died a week after.
I was sitting with Mike, and I said, what is Howard's trick?
How does he do it?
And this other woman who was there, and they both agreed, he writes wonderful letters.
He cares.
Nobody writes letters anymore.
And maybe Ransom was doing the same kind of thing.
He said, you have no idea.
Some of these people, like my mother or whomever, to get a wonderful, charming, informative, thoughtful letter goes a long way.
He said, he writes beautiful letters.
I said, that's it?
He said, you know, I stroke them, I guess.
But Ransom, there was no way that anybody could deliver on all the promises that Ransom came up with.
But did anybody expect them to either, I wonder?
Oh, sometimes.
Like, I mean, what do you mean promises?
To individuals?
To individuals, to heirs, to, you know, things like, oh, they have Evelyn Wallet's papers, his library, all of his manuscripts, his diaries,
Not all of his manuscripts, but the manuscripts that he had.
And you want to know what I want to know?
Where is the wainscoting of Evelyn Wall's library?
Because apparently we bought it.
And I never saw it in those 13 years that I was there.
And it might be out in storage in North Austin, or it might have been eaten by the tournament a long time ago, or it might be in somebody's den.
I can't imagine anybody wanting it.
I know where his desk is.
I know where his ink stand is.
I know where his pins and nibs are.
But I don't know where the wainscoting is off of the walls.
But there was an idea that if you're buying the library, somehow the idea got involved that it would all be ensconced in an actual installation.
And they had paid all kinds of hullabaloo and brokerage fees to get the wainscoting through customs and all that kind of stuff.
But I never saw any plans to actually build it.
It was paid for, right?
Oh, I'm sure so.
And with the Earl Stanley Gardner room, they were going to recreate, they have recreated this study, you know, and you punch this button and this tape recording of Earl Stanley Gardner talks about this stuffed blowfish on his desk.
Do I get to see all this stuff in him there?
Sure.
Sure stuff.
And all of his citations from every little, you know, support your lowest local police department association and all this stuff.
It's in a room where you can walk around and look in the windows, and apparently they took all these detailed measurements for the whole thing.
So they replicated it?
They replicated it, and in fact, after they got it in, or after the stuff had come and had been shipped out from California, the architect in the building department or something needed to take a few more measurements
And I think this was all like in a study that might have been like in a separate little house or something that Gardner's wife wanted to turn into like a playroom for their grandchildren or something.
So after the second the stuff had been carted out, she had a wall-to-wall kind of an indoor-outdoor carpeting put in there.
And the architect thought that it had been there all along and went to great pains to have it reproduced.
as an underlayment for the rugs and things, and really it was just added after that.
But those stories don't have anything to do with the real history of what that institution is about.
I think that when Texas bought its Gutenberg Bible, which Bill Todd was very much involved with getting
And this is very late in life that this was gotten.
There was much discussion about the fact that it was instant ivy.
That was crazy down there.
And certainly the acquisition of the Forzheimer books was seen as in a fell swoop to be able to compete with the
with the more traditional collection of rare books in the nation.
And... Was that a phrase used down there, instant idea?
Yeah.
And I don't think it would appear that way in the Board of Regents minutes, but... But I mean people... People, I mean... ...in the corridors and... Yeah, I mean, and there was all... Well, was it said with a snicker, or... A little bit of a snicker, actually, a snicker.
But the idea being...
Who could not get enough to Gutenberg Bible?
I mean, we don't have one in Boston, you know.
Well, we don't have one in Philadelphia, either.
The widens have one.
Dr. Rosenbach had lots of them.
It's not a rare book.
But, I mean, why did we have to have one?
Why wasn't having the greatest 20th century collection good enough?
What's the motivation?
If some rich oil guy buys it, take it, for God's sakes.
Nope, nope, that's not the way it works.
That's not the way it works.
And would you disagree with that?
Um, all I'm saying... I just don't see it in my backyard as somebody else's.
Oh, I guess that's true.
I don't mind.
There were three of them on the market at the time we bought that one.
Did you get a complete one?
Mm-hmm.
Not enveloped, of course.
No.
Um, but...
I think maybe part of the Texas story, which other people have written about, is the why.
I mean, was there the legendary pride of a Texan, and how is it manifested in this kind of institutional electing?
But I want to tell you that most people in Texas
don't know anything about HRC or what's there.
It's irrelevant.
Irrelevant.
To my point of thinking.
There are 50 colleges in Boston.
I don't know how many of them.
I've never heard of the Houghton Library of Messages.
It's a historical society in the Athens.
And the treasures there are as rich as anywhere.
But it would be total wounds to 90 percent of the population.
And this is, we're talking about pretty
Well, and you also have to consider the nature of the collection.
I mean, the man on the street is more likely to have heard of George Washington, you know, and therefore be impressed that there are George Washington letters in a collection than he has heard of D. H. Lawrence, or Dane Edith Sybil, or Schechevril Sybil.
I'm going to ask you one question.
I'm going to try and catch a five o'clock plane.
I see the 5 o'clock and 9 o'clock.
I think I'll grab the 5.
And this came to me this morning at 5.15 or so.
I was driving to the airport.
But do you think that there is such a thing as bibliomania on the institutional level?
And I wonder if Texas is the example of that.
Certainly, Texas has been bibliomania.
When you talk about having X number of Lady Charlie's lover, there is no sense to that.
Now, I have to say, that's going too far as a book.
No, no.
There could be a sense to it.
The idea of the fact that there might have been textual changes within the press.
If that's the case, but it probably isn't.
And also, this is the copy that was owned by Lady Oddline Morrell.
That's an entirely different argument.
But if they are acquiring this title to get as many copies of the first printing as they can, I just don't .
Well, bibliomania is subject to many different definitions and interpretation.
But I think that it's not necessarily a bad thing.
Well, the title of my book is A Gentle Madness.
Well, I think there has to be a certain .
.
I'm one myself, you know, and I confess it's like .
Yeah, there has to be a certain amount of madness for an institution to buy things, but they have really no guarantee are going to be
relevant to research or .
It's a gut feeling.
Well, what motivates somebody or some place to go crazy?
That's an incorrect word, but to do things, to acquire books that you would never do for anything else.
I mean, you know, you'd go out to dinner.
You'd say, geez, 100 bucks or something for dinner.
to spend $500 for this John Cheever, John Cheever's first book, which comes to mind, $600.
Oh, it's wonderful, you know, mint, dust jacket, and without even breaking Sprite, you know, send it to me.
I can't speak to the motivation of individual book collectors.
I can have it.
I have to have it.
That's the phrase you hear all the time.
Yeah, I can't speak to that, because I'm not bitten by that bug.
I don't.
It must amuse you to see it, too.
I appreciate it in other people.
They have the money, and that's fine.
But I think that most collections that I have dealt with are dealing, institutional collections, are dealing more with research for public education.
Texas is by no means alone, by the way, in this.
I mean, the Lilly Library in Wilmington.
the University of Illinois.
You can go any number of... Cornell.
Yeah, but within the last 30 years, you know.
Are you going to talk to Lola?
Lola who?
Lola Gladys.
I don't know her.
Who is she?
She's the librarian of the Burke Collection.
Lola?
Lola Gladys.
S-Z-L-A-G-I-T.
And she is...
the librarian at the Berg collection in the New York Public Library.
Is she an interesting woman?
Oh, yeah.
Why do you say that?
She's a child in the New York Times, what, two years ago?
Yeah, maybe one day.
Three years ago?
It was before Charles died.
She's a book woman?
She is, oh, yes, in the old school.
She's Hungarian.
She wrote a book about the Berg, a pamphlet about the Berg.
as collectors, and it's an extremely fine collection.
And, you know, it's kind of a collector's collection with Anna Baker's first collection.
The Boston Public has an Argentine woman, Monti, is her first name?
Laura.
Nice woman.
I'm going to go to the airport, I think.
Okay.
This is good.
Can I have both of you?
Sure.
Talk some more.
And come back.
Oh, I will.
Do you think maybe that shitey letter?
We'll be fine at some point if I call you.
Well, I'll look for it and make a copy for you.
That would be wonderful.
That's the kind of thing, because I will be writing about shiteys.